And so our team was so excited about this bonus episode of First and Second Salmon.
As we summarize, they created this video summary.
Take a look.
In the days when Israel stumbled, when tribes stood divided, a barren woman wept at the altar.
Hannah's plea pierced the heavens, and God, in his mercy, gave her a son.
Brought to the temple in Shiloh,
Samuel grew in the presence of the Lord.
One quiet night, a voice called his name, startling him awake in the shadows, learning to speak the words of the unseen.
As he grew, the people were guided for 40 years, not always willing, but always searching.
Growing in selfishness, Israel cried, give us a king.
Despite the prophet's warning, the people demanded a crown.
and God allowed salt to rise, tall and strong, but consumed with pride.
Leading Israel in disobedience, his 40-year reign began to close.
The anointing passed to another.
In Bethlehem, a shepherd was chosen, a boy with a harp and a warrior's courage.
David stood against the giant's roar, and with a stone Goliath fell at Israel's feet.
the people saying his name in triumph and envy poison in Saul's heart.
Through a wilderness in exile, David fled.
Conflicts turned between anointed and rejected, chased through caves and fields of dust.
And when Saul fell, David ascended.
Crowned in the city of Zion, Jerusalem became his stronghold.
The Ark of God returned in splendor.
Yet even the chosen stumble,
In a moment of weakness, sin overtook him.
David's sorrow ran deep, but God's grace covered it all.
Another 40 years passed in triumph and sorrow and bloodshed and blessing.
Promises whispered in the shadows bound the people to something eternal.
Through profit, king, and covenant, the story moved forward toward a light not yet seen.
Three generations closer to an ancient promise on the way.
for man and kings and prophets alike, the story unfolds, a glimpse of what's to come, a greater king who will reign forever, fulfilling the promise, redeeming the world through the ultimate sacrifice.
I promise.
Have you ever said those words?
Do you ever heard those words?
To your son, to your daughter, I promise I'll be at the game, I'll be there on time.
And then you hit traffic.
Maybe kids, you said to your parents, I promise I'll clean my room before the end of the day.
And then you got busy.
Maybe your boss came to you and said, hey, by the end of this quarter, not only will you get a raise, but you're going to get a promotion.
Or maybe you said to your boss, I'll have the report on your desk by five o'clock on Thursday.
We live in a world of promises, but not all those promises are fulfilled.
We live in a world of broken promises in many ways.
When politicians say, if you elect me, I will.
When you shake a hand in business, hey, 50%, you, me, this is a handshake.
Often we find ourselves with broken promises getting disappointed and cynical.
And the question we ask ourselves is, is there anyone who keeps their promises?
And the answer is found only here.
There's only one person who always keeps his promises.
His name is God and his son, Jesus.
He's batting a thousand still to this day.
Not one promise that hasn't been fulfilled or on the way to fulfillment.
Our God keeps his promise.
So as we review the books of First and Second Samuel, we're going to see the reigns of different leaders from generation to generation.
Eli, 40 years.
Samuel 40 years, Saul 40 years, David 40 years, leaders, but they're not the main characters of the story.
The main characters in First and Second Samuel, the main character is God himself, the one who always keeps his promises.
And for 37 weeks, we've been seeing that God is always faithful, but the question is for how long is God faithful?
Will it ever run out?
And so I want to bring you to a conversation that God has with Moses on the mountain as he's given Moses the Ten Commandments.
He's just led the people
out of Egypt, out of slavery through the Red Sea.
He's defeated the enemies.
He's fed them with bread from heaven and water from a rock, and he whispers this to Moses about who he is.
He says this to Moses, I lavish unfailing love for a thousand generations on those who love me and obey my commands.
I am the God who lavishes.
I pour out my unfailing love.
Hestid is the Hebrew word.
The love that doesn't give up on you, the love that never breaks down, the God who loves no matter what you do, I will still love you.
And how long does God do that for a thousand generations?
For those who love and obey my commands, for those who have a desire to honor me, my love will never, and now I was doing the math, and I was like,
If a generation is 40 years, that means for 86 generations since this conversation, God has been showing His faithfulness to His people from generation to generation.
And I'm personally so grateful that faithfulness has come to me in our generation, aren't you?
Like this moment that we celebrate and reflect and all that God has done.
Now, check out this promise is going to happen.
And you know what's going to happen next?
Moses is going to walk down that mountain, and he's going to see the entire nation of Israel circled around a golden calf worshiping.
And you're thinking, oh, this is where God's like, yeah, these people aren't worth it.
But notice God doesn't give up on his promise because, well, you see this in 2 Timothy 2.
If we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, for he cannot deny who he is.
If God makes a promise, he will always keep it.
This is our God for a thousand generations.
He is God.
And so as we think about what does that mean for me?
Or maybe you're hearing you're like, Doug, did you say you guys have been in first and second, like the whole year, like 37 weeks, you're reading a 3000 year old story of men and women?
What does that have to do with my life?
I'm just trying to pay my bills and raise my kids and get along my roommate and not quit my job and freak out.
I'm just trying to get through life and I have this combination of numbness and anxiety and dreams and hopes and fears and up and down.
I'm just trying to get through life.
What do these old stories have to do with me?
And that's a really great question.
The Bible answers that question in Romans chapter 15 verse 4.
For everything that was written in the past was written to teach us so that through the endurance taught in the Scriptures and the encouragement they provide, we might have
Hope.
If you need to hope, raise your hand.
Hope is like oxygen for the soul.
You can live without food for a period of time.
You can live without water for a period of time, but you cannot live without hope.
Hope for the human soul is the reason you go on.
And the Bible says these stories, they give us hope in the God who is faithful even when we're not.
And even in our imperfection, we can learn a lot by the men and women who have gone before us.
How do they follow God through the ups?
How do they follow God through the downs, through successes and through failures?
And we've been talking about this idea.
We are shaped by the stories that we tell and the songs that we sing.
So we see the entire nation of Israel and the people of God, Christians for 2,000 years have been shaped by these stories and by these songs.
And they're gonna help us to frame this because we're gonna look at five people in the book of First and Second Sam and we're gonna look at their life journey and we're gonna ask ourselves the question, what can I learn from this person in my life?
And four of them are the four leaders that served each 40 years.
But the first one is a woman named Hannah.
She opens the book, a first and second sample.
This is a woman who is struggling in life.
She's struggling because she can't have a child in the ancient world.
If you were a woman and you couldn't have a child, it was like your everything, your identity, your purpose in life.
And her husband has another wife who's having children, and she's being provoked by her rival.
Now, having two wives is another story for another day, but not a good idea for thinking about it, just so you know.
Hannah is being provoked on a daily basis by her rival.
And she's praying on a daily basis, and God's not answering.
And she's surrounded by insensitive men.
Her husband's like, well, at least you have me.
That does not help.
And the priest Eli, she's her praying pastor, he's pouring out her heart, thinks she's drunk.
And so she's surrounded by insensitive men.
God's not answering her prayer.
She's being provoked by her rival, and this is going on year after year after year.
So if you're in a run that's been like, man, it's been a rough three, four, five, six, seven years, and I'm just tired, then I want to say Hannah understands what it's like to be in that place.
But when she's pouring out her heart in the beginning of this book, she says, God, if you give me a child, I'll give him back to you.
And God answers this prayer and she becomes pregnant.
She has a little boy named Samuel.
And in this moment, she realizes God is faithful.
And now how am I going to respond?
And she responds by giving this prized child, the light of her life, the apple of light back to God.
And when she does this, she writes a song.
And this song is a frame for the entire book of First and Second Samuel.
This song is a song.
that shapes not just the story in the Old Testament, but arrives all the way to a young virgin in Nazareth named Mary.
And she also writes a song that sounds a lot like this song.
And I want to read part of that song to you.
First, Samuel chapter two, then Hannah prayed and said, my heart rejoices in the Lord.
In the Lord's name, my horn is lifted high.
My mouth boasts over my enemies for I delight in your deliverance.
There is no one holy like the Lord.
There is no one beside you.
There is no rock like our God.
Do not keep talking so proudly or let your mouth speak such arrogance for the Lord is a God who knows and by him deeds are weighed.
Her reflexive response to God's faithfulness is praise, it's worship, it just flows right out of the mouth at the very beginning.
This is my
God, my heart rejoices.
He has lifted up my horn, my strength.
He's given me a child.
He's answered my prayer.
And all those mocking voices, all those people who said it's never going to happen.
All those people who laughed under their breath, my God showed up for me.
And it's a powerful expression of joy and gratitude as she writes this song.
And she writes a powerful sentence, right?
If I should say, you know, God, you are the God who knows.
Think about that sentence.
In a world with billions of people today, God knows you.
He sees you.
He's not so busy with all the wars and challenges and issues of the world that he doesn't see and know and care for you.
And Hannah, she understands this instinctively that God can see even her great deep internal struggles that she cannot articulate and this leads to her song of praise.
And then in verse six, what can God do?
Look at what she said, this is what God can do.
The Lord brings death and makes alive.
He brings down to the grave and raises up the Lord sends poverty and wealth.
He humbles and he exalts.
He raises the poor from the dust and he lifts the needy from the ash heap.
He seats them with princes and he has them inherit a throne of honor.
For the foundation of the earth are the lords.
On them, he has set the world and he will guard the feet of his faithful servants.
but the wicked will be silenced in the place of darkness.
And it's not by strength that one prevails.
Those who oppose the Lord will be broken.
The most high will thunder from heaven.
The Lord will judge the ends of the earth.
He will give strength to his king and exalt the horn of his anointing.
What does she say?
She says, listen, this is what I know.
God takes humble people and raises them up and takes proud people and sets them down.
He's been doing it for years and years and centuries and centuries because he's the one who's ultimately in control.
Isn't it good to know God's in control?
If there are people in the world and people in life that just seem to go, how are they getting away with this?
God has a way to do this and God has a way to do this.
because he's made the entire world.
She says he's made the foundations of the world of people who think they're in control, aren't in control like they think they are because God is the God who knows and weighs the deeds of people.
And even where there is evil, his purposes will prevail.
And then she says this, and notice this, she is the mom of the first prophet of Israel, the boy Samuel.
But the mom of the first prophet in Israel is herself a prophet because she says two things.
that haven't happened yet.
Look at the last part of her song.
She says, he will give strength to his king.
Does Israel have a king yet?
No, they won't have a king for decades, but God's using her to speak prophetically about the king that will come.
And not just the king like Saul or David.
No, she says, and he will exalt the horn of his
anointed one, the anointed one, the Messiah, that there is a king that's eventually going to come who's going to be anointed by God, who's going to do what an earthly king cannot do.
And his name is Jesus.
And so her song and her story sets the frame for the entire book.
And her response to God is faithful is, I want to be faithful.
I want to lend my son back to God because he's lent my son to me.
And so as you think about this,
image of this mom is sort of like a mirror to us.
Am I faithful when God is faithful?
Do I offer worship when he answers my prayer?
Would I be willing to give up something very important to me because he's worth it?
And these are important questions that Hannah causes us to reflect on because she can give us encouragement to live a life that honors God.
Now, the second person we're introduced to in the book of 1st Samuel is a man named Eli.
This is the older man, about 80 years old, that Hannah's gonna drop her young boy Samuel off with.
And he was maybe at one time a devoted follower and leader of God.
But now he's slipped a bit.
He's compromised in his faith and his life.
The Bible describes him as vastly overweight and having really bad vision, not just physically,
But spiritually, he's the one who can't see that she's crying out to God and point her heart.
He thinks she's drunk.
He's lost his spiritual discernment.
And he's got two sons who are robbing people as they come to church, taking their sacrifice for themselves, having sex with women in the temple itself.
And this is a really, really difficult thing to see.
A man who was a leader or supposed to be a leader, he's not leading, he's passive.
And he's grown fat because he's eating all the meat his sons are stealing.
And one day, God sends to Eli a prophet, an unnamed prophet, who asks Eli a series of questions from God himself, a questions like, do you honor your sons more than me?
Why would you do that?
Why do you not restrain your sons and their wickedness?
Don't you see?
And then he says this, God's speaking, those who honor me, I will honor, but those who despise me,
will be disdain.
You see, there is a promise that God has that he's going to lavish his unfailing love for a thousand generations on people who love and obey him.
But there is another side to that promise.
And the other side of that promise is those who despise me, those who hate me, those who reject me on this consistent basis.
Well, they're going to be despised themselves because when God says to Moses,
Hey, I'm gonna lavish my love in a thousand generations.
The sentence before that, the verse before that is verse five of Exodus 20.
I the Lord your God and the jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generations of those who hate me.
So the first part of the promise is an invitation.
If you will honor me, I will honor.
If you will love me and desire to keep my commands, I've got my blessing over you for a thousand generations, but if you hate me,
Despise me.
Reject me.
I'm not going to force my blessing on you, but no, you'll be left over here.
And that sin won't just affect you.
It will visit your kids and your grandkids and your great-grandkids to the third and fourth generation.
Now Eli hears this, but doesn't change.
And what happens to his life?
Well, he and his sons both die on the same day.
And then his son's son dies on the same day.
And then if you follow his descendants who are priests in Israel, these are the priests of Nob who salt kills as he's chasing David.
And then finally, a biothar, the last descendant of Eli dies in the reign of Solomon, which means what God said to Moses and what God said to Eli both came true.
You despise me.
That sin is gonna be a legacy.
It's gonna visit your kids and grandkids and it's gonna
It's going to destroy people's lives.
You're sitting in compromise as a state with you.
It travels from generation to generation.
As a person, we've got to ask ourselves a question.
If I'm faced with this decision to be like Hannah or be like Eli, who do I want to be like?
Do I have a heart that wants to honor God or is there a compromise in my life?
Compromise.
You know where you know what's right, but you're a little off.
It's just like a little
Like most of my life is right, but this is like an area right here.
And that compromise won't just affect you.
It will affect the people around you.
And there's a chance to honor God in that compromise.
Say, God, I want to repent and I want to make it right.
I want to honor you without compromise.
I want my heart to be devoted to you.
Is there, is there a passivity in your life?
A man who fails to restrain his sons.
He knows what's right, but can't have the hard conversation.
And maybe it's because he cared more about what his kids thought than what God thought.
But whatever that was, it led to their destruction and his.
And so, just like Romans 15 says, these stories are an encouragement for us.
Well, 1 Corinthians 10 says some of these stories are a warning for us that we don't do what those people did in response to God's invitation.
For those who love him, obey his commands, who honor him, there's great blessing for a thousand generations.
For those who reject him, ignore him, put their hand out.
a judgment that's coming.
Eli experiences that judgment.
Now, the third character, Samuel, this little boy, who had a very young age, learned how to hear God's voice and say, your servant is listening.
And God would speak to Samuel and Samuel would speak to the people.
The Bible says of Samuel that when God raised him up, none of his words fell to the ground.
Imagine that.
All the words we use, none of Samuel's words,
were wasted.
And those words led to the revival of God's people and victory in battle.
Samuel, he started a school of the prophets that for decades and centuries through Israel's history were the conscience of the nation.
Now, maybe you've asked this question as we've gone through first Samuel, like who wrote the book first and second Samuel?
Because didn't Samuel die in the very beginning?
Like who wrote the rest?
And that'd be a very good question.
That means you're a thinking Christian, right?
So scholars think that Samuel
And then Nathan and then Gad, three prophets of Israel, documented the story and history of the prophets and the kings.
And that's why we have the book we have today.
And so Samuel's legacy lives on not just as one who spoke the word of God, but who passed it on to generations of prophets who told the stories to the people of God because we are shaped by the stories that we tell and by the songs that we sing.
And if I was looking at Samuel's life,
Well, you see a heart that wants to honor God in all that he does.
And so as we sit here today, I'm going to ask you, do you want to be a person who honors God in all that you do?
Do you want to be a person whose number one goal in life is to please God, to bring a smile to his face?
It's an important question.
I was talking to
As somebody who's a part of our church and she's discipling this young girl and this young girl's like, so that's not me, but I want it to be me.
And that's just really honest.
Like, because some of you might be sitting here going like, do I want to love God and serve God?
Yes, but I'd rather be rich.
I'd rather be famous.
I'd rather have my own company.
I'd rather be this or be that, but I want to honor God first.
I want that to be my number one goal.
So maybe a great prayer for you as God.
I want to want to honor you first in my life.
And listen, if you're looking for a Bible verse like a life verse, your brand new Christian, 1 Samuel 230, those who honor me, I will honor.
If that sentence defines the way you make decisions, the way you look at the world, God will bless your life beyond what you can ever imagine.
I promise you, when God makes a promise, he's not going to break.
He's going to keep it because for a thousand generations, he honors those who honor him, which leads us to the next
character of the story, the first king of Israel, his name is Saul, and Saul starts out great.
Saul is a man's man.
He's a head tall than any other soldier in Israel.
He's a mighty and brave warrior and humble, and God provides a great army around him, and he experiences early on some really great victories.
Saul is the man, but we watch in Saul this slow descent, much like Eli.
compromise, pride, and compromise shows up in his life this way.
He's in a difficult situation.
He has to make a decision, and God tells him to do the hard thing.
Here's how he frames his decision-making.
I know what God said, but I thought.
Those two phrases put together can destroy your life.
God said, but I thought.
It seems like this is a small thing.
Like I know what God says about, you know, offering my body to him and being sexually pure for faithful in marriage and chasing my singleness.
I know what God says that the things I have don't belong to me so to give generously.
I know what God says.
I should forgive and not hold on to grudge.
I know what God says, but my situation's a little bit unique.
See, let me explain why what God said doesn't apply to me.
We do this all the time because we're human.
And because the mind has an infinite capacity to rationalize and justify why we do what we do and make it not a bad thing, that's called sin.
And so we watch what seems like he's really small compromises, not waiting on God, not destroying everything God says to do.
And it leads to this descent in Saul of a paranoia, jealousy of David.
He starts making monuments to himself because he wants to make sure he's praised and
And pride grips him to the point where it drives him mad, he ends up dying of suicide.
It's a sad and sobering life.
And so here's the question for, first of all, I want us to think about.
It's not, is there pride in my life?
Listen, if you're breathing and pride is it working your life?
If there's pride in working your life, just raise your hand, okay?
If you're breathing, raise your hand, same thing, same answer.
The question is not, is there pride in my life?
The question is, where is pride showing up in my life?
See, that's what Saul does for us.
He provides a mirror.
Where is pride showing up for me?
Maybe pride shows up in defensiveness.
Where any time someone tries to tell me something, I put my wall up.
What about you?
That's not me.
That's not what it matters.
And no one can tell you anything because the walls are so highly erector.
Maybe for you, it's
Every conversation someone starts, you turn it into you.
Well, let me tell you about me and blah, blah, blah, blah.
You have this like, you know, all these words about you and all the conversations who always turn to you or maybe, maybe pride is manifest in your life and all this stuff is mine.
I don't want to share it.
Maybe pride is manifest in your life for you.
Overcompensate for your inadequacies like solved it and try to make yourself someone you're not.
And so your public life and your private life are getting more and more distant from each other because pride forces you to keep up the image, that image where on social media, it looks like the perfect light, but you know, under the scenes and God knows it is not the same person.
Listen, wherever pride is at work and pride is at work in your life, be cautious because we can see pride in everyone else's life except our own.
And this is why we need God's word and good friends to teach us and show us
who we are and how we are living our life.
And then the final person we see in First Amazon is David.
He's the one that is most famous in the story.
He's the little boy that kills the giant.
He's the one who has maybe a difficult childhood forgotten by his dad, rejected by his brothers, the little punk kid, the nobody kid who rises all the way to the throne.
He's like the guy we love to cheer for, the underdog.
And he's described as a man after God's own heart.
But David also stumbles.
and falls and disappoints us.
He makes promises that he does not keep, but there's something about David that knows how to respond to those moments and repent and humble himself.
He knows he deserves the judgment of God, but he constantly throws himself on the mercy of God.
And there's a moment in David's life where David says to God, God, you've done so much for me.
I wanna build you a house.
I wanna build you a temple.
And God says to David, no, you're not gonna build me a house.
I'm gonna build you a house.
And the house I'm going to build you is you're going to have descendants after descendants after descendants and the line of your Kingly reign and legacy will never end.
What is God saying?
A love, a faithful love that will last from generation to generation.
Now here's what happens.
Next, David dies and Solomon, his son reigns and all these different kings raise and a lot of them do some really evil things.
And there's a phrase that follows in the book of kings and chronicles.
And it's a phrase to describe the judgment that should be happening to the kings that doesn't happen because of David.
117 years after David, there's a descendant of David named Johorim.
And Johorim is doing wicked and evil things.
And look at God's response to the judgment on
Jerusalem, he says, yet the Lord would not destroy Judah for David, his servant's sake, as he promised him to give him always a light and to his children.
For David's sake, God promised.
No matter what happens next, I will not remove my favor over this nation or my promise over David, because when God makes a promise, he always keeps it.
This is what you call a long legacy.
Hannah has a long legacy.
Her songs are still being sung today.
Samuel has a long legacy of leading schools of prophets who continue to speak prophetically into the church.
David has a long legacy, 117 years after he dies.
His influence is still being felt in the fifth generation of Israel's
nation.
So the question that I've been thinking about and something I read this week that's been rattling through my brain is, am I the type of person who's honored my ancestors and blessed by descendants?
You know, if we're in this place between one generation and we're before us and all the lessons we can learn and we're about to pass our faith on to the next generation, do I have a way, have I found a way to honor
the heart and mind and faith of people like Hannah, Samuel and David.
By taking all that and incorporating into my life as I follow Jesus, and then have I taken, and am I blessing my descendants to the third and fourth generation?
Am I thinking past myself?
You see, because as we look through the book of First and Second Samuel and we ended, the story of First and Second Samuel does not end there.
You see, Jesus would say a thousand years after these moments, he would say, you know, all those stories, they point to me.
The song that Hannah wrote, there's points in me, the anointed king.
The promise that God made to David about the legacy and the king, the anointed one that would come from his legacy that's talking about me.
You see, God knew through the history of time that at the perfect moment he was gonna answer the prayers of Hannah and the prayers of Samuel and the prayers of David for the nation that he was gonna fulfill the promise that he made to Moses on that mountain.
I am the God who shows a faithfulness to a thousand generations and he did that in the coming of Jesus.
Galatians 4, when the set time had fully come, God sent his son, born of a woman, born under the law, to redeem those under the law that we might receive adoption to sonship.
God demonstrates his love for us, that while we were still sinners, he sent his son Jesus to die in our place.
Aren't you grateful for the goodness of God, the faithfulness of God?
He is faithful even.
when we are not.
And so God's faithful for a thousand generations.
And we've been talking about all these stories because the Bible says that one generation should commend the works of God to the next generation.
And so we've been telling God stories for the last 40 days.
And I want to share with you just in a very practical way, the way that faith is being passed on to the next generation, the heart of worship, the heart of Hannah writing this song of gratitude.
You see, behind this wall, there's a group of middle school and high school students who are praising God and learning God's word and learning to share their faith.
And on this side of the wall, there's Calvary Kids, our young kids learning how to sing songs and learn God's word and do all the things that it means to honor God in their life.
And there's a leader on this side of the wall, her name is Gabby.
And she doesn't just lead our kids and praise and worship every week.
She leads teams to know and follow Jesus.
Gabby said to a young girl, Ariana, in eighth grade, hey, I want you to help us teach the kids and Ariana has this idea.
She said, hey, what if we teach the kids, like in fourth and fifth grade, how to write their own songs?
Like, who does that?
Well, that's the idea coming from an eighth grader.
And so she teaches the kids how to write some of the songs and listen to Mo, a fifth grader song that she wrote.
When I feel sad, Lord, you help me feel better and give me signs that it's, oh,
Okay.
Faith being formed in a young girl who knows in the bigness of the universe, God sees her sadness and will make it, okay, that's how faith is formed.
Listen to Harper's song.
I will praise you because you are powerful.
All creation praises your name.
Every minute you show us your power through the smallest things.
You are so glorious, your love never fails.
I will praise you till the end of my
days.
Harper, this young girl, can see that in all of the bigness of God's creation that he is worthy of praise, but in the smallest things, he is intimately involved in details of life.
Hannah sang that song and now Harper singing that song.
And I want to tell you another story of a woman like Hannah named Olga who prayed for her son who was far from God.
And how God heard the cry and the prayer of this mom, our God is faithful from generation to generation.
Take a look at Olga's story.
So I can remember at a young age, my parents would be fighting and it would get pretty hectic, pretty wild at times.
During Christmas, my mom and my dad came to me and they basically told me we're gonna get divorced.
At this time, I'm just getting ready to start high school.
And so this was probably one of the most traumatic experiences for me as a kid.
He was my only biological child.
I had helped raise three brothers before him, the youngest 12 years apart from him.
So he was like my china doll.
And I spoiled him deliciously and unapologetically.
He was obedient.
He was loving.
He was a great student.
I mean, you know, I don't have
and a major trauma when he was young.
Until his father and I started having problems.
And then he sensed that there was something very wrong going on in the house.
And so that's when he just changed.
I began to hang out with guys much older than me.
Guys that were involved in drugs and kind of gang stuff.
And they became my family.
And that became kind of my pattern across my high school years.
There was a lot of
violence during that time.
I was getting arrested.
My anger became directed at my family.
I was mad at my mom and my dad.
They had basically ruined my life.
So I became extremely angry, bitter.
You know, you would never see me smile, especially with my parents.
You know, I just have walls up with them.
I went to UCF to get a finance degree.
My mom thinks, oh, he's doing great, he's getting his finance degree, and really I'm just running drugs.
I'm also taking classes, but again, I'm doing well, I'm passing.
And my mom and my stepdad, I think, were able to see that from afar, and that whole time just continued to pray for me and love on me.
It was always the letters that I remember the most that would tell me they were praying for me.
You know, I think when you read the Bible, you see Paul, he's always telling the church, it's like, hey, I'm praying for you.
I'm praying for you.
But they prayed persistently.
And it was never judgy.
It was never.
When are you going to start going to church with it?
It was never that.
It was always like, hey, you want to come to church with us?
And I'm like, no.
I wasn't aware of what he was doing until he came home.
That's when we realized that there was a lot wrong.
And I know that every night he went to the clubs every night.
And we knew that, but the Lord was so gracious and just continued to impress on both of us that we were not to say, you know, you shouldn't be there, you shouldn't be doing this.
This is what you should be doing.
It was really remarkable because that would be my norm to explode and to explain that you are doing something wrong and it's going to be bad and you need to go to church.
But the Lord never impressed on us to do that.
You know, I would come home on Saturday nights and be in my room and I would watch a show, a guy called Howard Stern.
And at the end of the Howard Stern show, the very next show was Calvary Chapel, Bob Koi that would come on.
And I'm like, oh, that's the church that we go to.
And I sit there and I listen to Bible studies.
So God was just really softening my heart through that time.
And then I eventually end up going to a Tony Robbins conference.
He had said this phrase, if there's something you know you need to do, don't put it off.
It was in that moment that the light switch went off.
That everything that I had been hearing for all these months going to church, I realized that I wasn't right with God.
And the other thing that hit me was, I'm not gonna live forever.
And so for whatever reason in that moment, God decided to kind of make those two truths extremely heavy on me.
I realized who Jesus was.
I realized why he came and that it was for me personally.
It wasn't just for my crazy parents or crazy Christians.
In that moment, it all just came together in an instant.
And one of the things that I eventually settled on is like, all right, I'll go to church.
I was coming downstairs and I was in a hurry to get to church on time, and Chris is at the bottom of the stairs.
And he says, are you going to church?
And I said, yeah, I am.
And he said this.
He said, can I go with you?
And I almost passed out.
The pastor was saying that he was
near the end of his sermon and that he was going to ask if anybody wanted to come forward and give their lives to Christ.
And Chris immediately jumps up out of his seat and he runs, not walk, but runs really fast to get up to the front.
And so I was stunked.
I was, you know, I think I got up out of my chair.
I went up there and put my hand on him.
I realized that if I'm going to do this following Jesus thing, I need to give it my all.
And basically, for a year, I asked Tom, I said, hey, I just want to know everything that you know about the Bible.
Would you teach me?
And he would just do Bible studies with me.
He would gently correct me when he would see me straying.
He gave me the foundation, I think, for my walk.
It was through serving that I think I discovered.
I mean, I think I can teach
pastor Mike this year came to me I had been serving at that time in high school ministry and he said hey there's a there's a position that's opening up it's not a Fort Lauderdale it's it's part-time but it's at our new plantation campus would you want to take it and I'm like absolutely so I jumped in part-time
on staff at Calvary Plantation as the youth pastor.
Came on full time about two years later, and then it was just a couple years later where Pastor Doug called me on the phone.
He's like, are you ready to be the campus pastor at Plantation?
And I said, absolutely not.
I have no idea what I'm doing.
I opened my Bible, and my eyes took me to Jeremiah 31, 16 and 17.
And it says, thus says, the Lord refrain your voice from weeping, that your children will come back from the land of the enemy.
And that is an amazing statement to give to me, opening the world, and yet it was specifically for me.
I don't have to cry anymore, I don't have to worry anymore, I don't have to speak sad words anymore, because Chris is coming back from the land of the enemy.
It's an amazing thing.
So my wife and I, in high school, we were friends, but during this time, her and I became more than friends.
Very toxic relationship, we don't know Jesus.
And so we ended up breaking up, which was almost another traumatic experience for me.
But when I come to know Jesus, and I give my life to Him, somehow, someway, we get reconnected.
So I start to tell her about my relationship with Jesus.
She's kind of exploring some other things.
She's just coming off a broken relationship.
And then we start to reconnect, and I start to invite her to church, and she starts coming, and eventually she gives her life to Jesus.
Our relationship starts to be rebuilt slowly, but there's a lot of hurt and brokenness there, so it takes a while.
But eventually, I work up the nerve to propose, and we get married, and we're now a blended family, which is part of my story that is very similar, because I was part of the blended family.
And we started off with Savannah.
She was about three years old when we got married, and it was cool to just
See the example that Tom and the way that he loved me and cared for me is the same thing I now get to do for Savannah.
And the Lord has been so good to our family.
You know, we have three amazing kids.
Savannah is our oldest.
Elijah is our middle and Jacob's our youngest.
I think if I was able to talk to the old me, I would try to help him to see that the things of this world are fading, that there is something beyond this world and those things don't last forever.
And you know, I say that church almost every single time I'm doing an altar call, that my one regret as a Christian is that I didn't give my life to Jesus sooner.
And when I think about all the years that I raised it, they're suing the things of the world.
And now all the hurt and the scars I carry from that, like he's redeemed that, but there's still scars.
And if I could just go back in time and give my life to him like so much earlier, those would be some of the things I think I would say to a younger me.
Our God is faithful for a thousand generations.
Listen, if you're a mom or dad or grandma or grandpa and you have a prodigal son or prodigal dog, don't stop praying, don't stop pleading, don't stop begging, don't stop knocking on heaven's door because God wants to reach out to those who are far from him and he wants to use your prayers as a catalyst.
You see, it's crazy.
God didn't just want to save Chris.
He wanted to use Chris to reach others.
God didn't just want to bless Hannah's prayer.
No, Sam would bless generations of people.
And this is what God loves to do.
He still saves and delivers and heals, but he wants to use our life to go after the one.
And so I want us to just take a moment of reflecting on the goodness and the goodness and power of God that we see in Hannah's song that he is king over the university.
He made everything.
And if you've lost your awe at the bigness of God, if your head is buried in all the
Broken news of the world, and you haven't seen the beauty and power of God's creation.
Every morning, creation worships God.
And we hope this song brings you back to that sense of all.
And if you feel lost in the bigness of the world, like God doesn't see you, this is a reminder, like in Hannah's song.
He sees you, he knows you, and he has a way to go after the one in a way that you will never understand the mystery of his pursuit and love for us.
is beyond imagination.
So this song is called, So Will I.
And may this meditation fill our hearts and minds with awe and cause us to worship Him anew.
Here's the song.
So will I.
This is why we praise Him, a God who is faithful for a thousand generations, and that faithfulness has come to us, and that's why we worship.
But I know there's probably some people in this room that maybe you've been curious about God, or maybe even you believe in God, but you've never bowed your knee to God.
You've never said, God, I wanna make it my chief goal in life to honor you above all else.
I wanna believe the gospel that my sins can be forgiven, like Chris,
far away from God, but the prayers of his mom reached heaven.
Listen, I'm standing here because the prayers of my mom and dad and my grandma and grandpa reached heaven.
I was on a course to destruction and God came after me.
The God of the universe comes after the one.
And if you're that one person here far from God, we want to create this moment to give you a chance to respond.
A thousand generations of God's love and faithfulness to those who will come, those who will believe, those who will submit their lives to who he is.
This is why Jesus came to build a way back to God, to die on a cross, to pay your sin debt.
Today, I want you to know this, this world you live in is not an accident, and you are not an accident, and this moment is not a coincidence.
Everything in your life
God is creating to make you look maybe for the first time at him, because he is the missing piece of your life.
You were created for a relationship with a living God, but he doesn't force it on you.
He invites you to it.
Whoever is willing to come, whoever repents, whoever believes, they can be forgiven, they can be saved.
And so we're going to invite you.
You're already standing, step into the aisle.
Walk this way, say a prayer of faith.
We're gonna sing this song called Reckless Love, How God Pursues Us.
And here's what I know.
When you step into the aisle, this place will break into applause because we know what this meant for us when we did it.
And we can't wait to see heaven full because we've been praying for you.
If that's you right now, take that step into the aisle and walk this way and God will bless your life in a measurable ways.
Come on.
So we celebrate these decisions and we are so grateful that we get to be a part of this moment where you can meet Jesus, where your sins can be forgiven.
Here's the craziness.
Your whole life, your sin is separated you from God.
But now he's going to separate sin from you as far as the east is from the west as you make this confession.
His grace is going to meet you in this moment.
Here's the promise of God, and God always keeps His promise.
I will wash away your sin.
I will write your name in my book of life.
This is the most important place your name will ever be written, because that means your destination is heaven.
That means you are now a son or daughter of Jesus, and no one's going to snatch you out of the hand of God.
It is strong enough to hold you, and we are grateful to be a part of this moment.
And so in a moment, we're going to pray a prayer with you and lead you in this prayer, but I just want to offer one more encouragement.
Chris said, at the greatest regret he had it, he didn't do it sooner.
That's my greatest regret.
For so long, I wrestle with doubts and fears and questions that wanted to be in control and live my own life.
And I wasted a lot of time.
But there are certain moments that can change your whole life.
Not every moment in life is created equal.
And sometimes there's a weight of a moment that you feel.
It's you just know, like, I need to do something different.
And if you've never tried Jesus, he'd never given your life completely to him.
Listen, he's been waiting and people around you have been praying because they love you.
God doesn't just want to save you.
He wants to give you a purpose.
He wants you to have a long legacy.
And so, if that's you, we call this 20 seconds of insane courage.
Step into the aisle in front of all these people and walk forward and watch God receive you as a son, as a daughter.
Watch him do a miracle in your life.
If that's you, we're not gonna play another line.
Just step into the aisle and walk this way.
Come on, come on.
So good.
Come on.
If you're in the back or you're in the middle, people will move for you.
Trust me.
This is the miracle moment right here.
This is God going after people.
All right.
This is why Jesus came to seek and save the loss, to fill heaven.
So today, come on, we see people who are willing and ready to give their whole life to the only one who is worthy of our life, the only one who never breaks his promise.
And so here is the promise of God.
If you confess your sin, he is faithful and just to forgive you every sin and cleanse you from unrighteousness.
Today God is gonna keep that promise in your life.
Come on, come on.
I'm so glad you're here.
I don't want moments like this to end.
This is like such a great moment.
All these prayers that people prayed for you.
God is answering right now.
Because He's faithful.
Even when we're not.
And so I'm gonna give you some words to say to God.
He knows you.
He knows everything about you.
And as you pray this prayer sincerely, as you confess you're a sinner, that you need to save you.
As you thank Jesus for coming to die in your place, and now you're gonna live for Him.
And that prayer of confession is just the beginning of the great adventure of following Jesus.
And so, save this to God, He's listening.
Save this out loud.
Lord God, I open my heart and I invite you inside.
Forgive my sin.
Today I repent.
Now, fill me with your spirit, and I will walk with you all the days of my life.
I pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Guys, congratulations.
We are so excited for you.
So listen, before you go back to your seats.
You just made the most important decision of your life.
I'm going to ask you to give us five more minutes.
I'm going to ask you to follow me and our crew over to the open door where we're going to give you a Bible and have a quick conversation with you.
You'll be back with your friends in just a moment.
So go this way, guys.
I'll meet you there.
Let's give them a hand as they go this way, Church.
And Church, we're not gonna close in a worship song.
We're gonna close in a commission that as you walk out these doors, pick up an invitation to invite a friend because an invitation can change someone's eternal destination.
Pick up a shoebox, pick up some food and bring it back because we wanna be a people on a mission sharing and showing the love of Jesus.
We will see you next Sunday for a great celebration.
God bless you.
Have a great rest of your day.
Thanks for listening to today's message.
You know, here at Calvary, we believe a relationship with Jesus changes everything.
And if you've decided to follow Jesus, we'd love for you to text the word belief to 31352, so you can find out what it means to follow Christ.
And to learn more about Calvary and all of our campuses, you're free to visit calvaryftl.org.